---
category: Tech
layout: post
title: Setting up a raspberry pi as a music server
---
Last Sunday at 11am I ordered a Raspberry Pi of Amazon on a whim. It arrived Monday (Labor day) before 4pm. Please hear me out before judging my consumerist behavior.

I actually have a specific use case for that Pi - I wanted to have a silent music server to feed high res music to my stereo. In 2013 I bought a consumer grade NAS for this purpose which died on me in 2018 causing me to pull out the hard drive and to painstaklingly recover the music stored only on this drive using a bootable Ubuntu USB key and an external hard drive. This was worth doing because high res music is expensive ($20-30 per album). For the better part of two years, my fancy music files sat unsused on an external hard drive and were also backed up to cloud storage.

Two things are interesting to me about this situation:
1) The ease of setup of the RasPi. I have played with embedded Linux devices in the past. 15 years ago I flashed a Netgear NAS onto a custom Gentoo Linux. This was a painful experience, it took hours to do, voided the warranty and installation and configuration of software were painful and obscure. All of this was not really helped by the device having a super slow CPU and me not figuring out how to set up a real PC to cross compile the code for it. Now I'm able to order an embedded board, assemble it in 10 mins, spend 5 mins flashing the OS to an extra SD card I have sitting around and it boots into a desktop GUI (in 4k o:)) and connects to my wifi immediatelly. This experience was arguably more smooth than setting up the boxed NAS that I got in 2013. I installed a media server (Plex) in minutes and my music files are on a USB SSD wich I can even plug in to my PC and add music from there. On top of that, the Pi offers a huge amount of flexibility since it is running a real OS.
2) The fact that my music has sat for so long. It's amazing how much we all gravitate towards convenience - and Tidal and Spotify were convenient ways to listen to the music I wanted to listen to. They fell short in 20% of the cases where music wasn't available on these online services and the quality was also not as high as the high res files I used to play on the stereo - but it was good enough and I had a hard time getting over the inertia of setting up something better. Access and convenience beat the quality for me, even in the face of significant sunk cost (the high res files I already paid for).